Santiago's story begins in the city of Villavicencio,
Colombia. As a young boy, his parents were very strict and
always expected the best of him: good grades, good behavior,
a good appearance. They just wanted him to be a good kid.
His father was a physical education teacher, so he was
always encouraged to be active and play sports like
volleyball, soccer, and basketball, just to name a few. So
ever since he was a child, Santiago has felt this intrinsic
need to be learning or doing something useful at all times.
As a result, the majority of his childhood was spent
studying, playing sports, or at home with his family. He
didn't have much time to socialize with people and make
friends because his parents were always putting him in
whatever productive or educational programs they could find.
And when Santiago was 14, his parents came across an English
course at a local language institute. They didn't know when
or how, but they knew that being able to speak English
proficiently would be an extremely valuable skill to possess
in the future. So they enrolled them in the course. But the
problem for Santiago was that this course consisted of just
one four-hour class per week for three years.
A four-hour class in which they focus solely on grammar
rules and basic vocabulary. Of course, Santiago found the
information useful, but at some point he realized that
during a four-hour class, he spent less than 10 minutes
actually speaking English. But his parents had enrolled him
in the course, so he had to finish it. He followed the
course, he memorized the information, passed the exams, and
he was certified as a C1 or advanced level English learner.
But after three years, he still wasn't able to maintain even
a basic conversation with a real person. And that's when
Santiago decided to look for a better way to learn English.
And just like many of us in the modern era, he started with
video lessons on YouTube. Then he searched for English
teachers on social media, and he realized that he could
learn a bunch of useful things about English just using his
cellphone. So we spent the next four months immersing
himself in the language, discovering new teachers, watching
videos and taking notes. He also began teaching himself how
to code online, and he was even using that as a way to learn
English because the majority of content made for self-taught
programmers is in English. But that wasn't enough. While he
was getting exposed to new vocabulary and his comprehension
was starting to improve, he still wasn't able to put
together basic sentences without translating the words in
his head first. Now, the next part of this story is key
because this is the point at which most English learners do
one of two things. Number one.
Continue consuming loads of content in English. Reading,
listening, and watching occasionally. Option number two,
begin looking for opportunities to practice speaking English
with real people, everyday. Santiago chose option number
two. He started searching for online communities in which he
could speak with real people everyday. And luckily, these
days there are a lot of apps and websites that help you meet
people from all over the world. For example, Discord is a
popular platform for creating and managing online
communities. It started out as an app for gamers to connect
with each other. But these days, all kinds of people, from
entrepreneurs to language learners, use the app to stay in
touch with other like-minded individuals and share ideas.
After hearing about some online communities for practicing
English, Santiago decided to join a few of them and look for
people to speak with. Now, thanks to his upbringing, he had
always had a hunger for knowledge and growth, so he was
determined to master the skill of communicating in English.
But the next problem he ran into was that the majority of
communities he found online were poorly managed. There were
lots of disrespectful members. There were no leaders. There
was no support. There was no real sense of community. But
did Santiago let that stop him from learning? Of course not!
I already told you, this kid is determined. He kept
searching for and joining different communities, interacting
on forums and consuming content on social media. Taking
advantage of any and every opportunity he had to practice
his English. One day, he was scrolling on social media and
saw a video of a teacher talking about his private online
community and he was encouraging people to join. Santiago
knew an opportunity like that was exactly what he'd been
looking for, so he didn't hesitate to join the community.
And this is when Santiago came to another fork in the road.
You had two options. The first one, choose the life of a
passive community member: never interacting, never starting
conversations, never asking questions. Option number two,
choose the life of an active community member: greeting the
community every day, sharing interesting content, and
encouraging people to join group discussions. Which option
do you think Santiago chose? After just four
months studying English by himself online, Santiago Gonzalez
could understand written and spoken English about many
different things - from relationships and sports to managing
databases and writing algorithms. This was all due to a
focused approach, consistent effort, and a burning desire to
learn something useful every single day. After just three
months of being an active member of an online learning
community and speaking with real people every day, Santiago
is now making friends, start in group discussions, making
people laugh, and he doesn't need to translate things in his
head before he says them. He's showing us all that simple
things like desire, effort, and consistency can take us very
far in life. He's made more progress by himself in the last
seven months than he made at his school in the previous
three years.
Now that Santiago has found a community with active members
and the support of a teacher, he can improve his
pronunciation, learn useful words and expressions, and get
all of his questions answered in a practical way. He can
practice speaking English daily, which gives him the
confidence to speak with anyone. And he can do all of this
without leaving his home. But it's more than that. Santiago
isn't just learning English now. He's listening to stories,
connecting with like-minded individuals, and learning life
lessons that will serve him for years to come. Santiago was
lucky enough to find a community of people whom he can look
up to as role models. When I asked him what he liked most
about his community, he said, "It's not just the English
I've learned. I see the people in this community and it
makes me think - if they can work that hard and be so
dedicated, why can't I? So it's very inspirational and I see
them as examples of what I would like to be in the future."
When you join a community of learners, you get more than
just an education. You become part of something like a
family. A network of people who have been in your position
and want nothing more than to see you succeed. The same way
a family raises and supports a growing child, a community of
people can raise and support individuals who are motivated
to learn and grow.